# Mobile Game Lighting Balancing Visual Quality with Performance Constraints

When it comes to ensuring that games look good, lighting is most certainly the biggest fundamental of that. It plays a key role in the visuals and aesthetics of a game and can take an incredibly flat looking scene or game and transfer it into something cinematic and chocked full of life. Though, historically, lighting in games hasn't been cheap on its hardware requirements. So how do you take something that often requires some of the strongest graphics and hardware that people can buy just so they can run their games at stable frame rates, and port it over to mobile games, whilst still having them run smoothly on their devices? Well that's the question mobile game develovpers have been asking themselves for nearly two decades now. Mobile developers have consistently had to fight against hardware limitations that would never be considered on consoles or PCs, whilst also considering the fact that their games could be played on a large range of devices from low end to high end phones that had drastically different specifications.

One of the primary lighting limitations on mobile games is their drastically lower computing power. Even in 2025 mobile GPUs are still struggling to even come close to the rendering capacity of PCs or even home consoles. As mentioned by Kim et al, (Kim et al., 2018), as recently as 2018 there have been large discussions about how mobile must trade off performance and energy if they want good looking games as things like global illumination is expensive and drains battery. This also further highlights another issue that mobile games often have when it comes to lighting that isn't commonly found amongst other gaming platforms, that being battery constraints. Mobile games are forced to operate within a tight battery budget in order to not drain too much of the user's total battery when playing games, even for say an hour. This means that power intensive rendering methods must otherwise be dropped unless the developers want to sacrifice battery for better visuals. Furthermore, baked high res assets that you would commonly find in console and PC games might simply be too large for most mid range phones leaving only flagship phones of any given year being able to actually support those higher quality textures. This ultimately puts a wrench in any high fidelity mobile game as even if it were possible to get it running smoothly on a mobile device, many phones people own wouldn't be able to run it.

Despite these limitations though developers have managed to create numerous techniques to achieve visually impressive lighting that operates with high performance on a variety of mobile hardware. As seen discussed by Frisvad, (Frisvad et al., 2005) mobile games will often work within the limitations of the hardware by using things like 2D perspectives, locked camera or more specifically, baked lighting. Baked lighting allows developers to render global illumination and store them in lightmaps that can be sampled during runtime with minimal cost. This works by capturing all the complex interactions before the game even is shipped and avoids requiring having the hardware do all those calculations and interactions in real time as the game runs. This allows mobile games to achieve a level of high fidelity that could be on par with many console and PC releases without completely sacrificing things like framerate or battery. 

Developers will often also rely on utilising stylised lighting that mask hardware constraints. Many mobile tiltes prefer simplified physically based shading and a lot of normal map usage to emu late complex lighting without actually having complex lighting. A mix of post processing attributes can also be applied to provide additional depth to the visuals of a game without being nearly as costly as just having lighting in the scene. Developers will primarily limit dynamic lights in a scene as to not have too many elements that require real time computing and calculations that could possibly tank framerate and performance whilst heavily draining battery. Things like using screen space shadows and blob shadows are cheaper alternatives to dynamic lighting. 

The decision between baked and dynamic lighting is a core choice for mobile lighting as baked lighting is incredibly efficent though can often lack flexibility due to the fact it cannot be changed during runtime. (Sun et al., 2023) mentions that developers will often use a balance of baked lighting and runtime lighting effects to still be able to pull off impressive feats with their lighting despite not particularly having the hardware to do so. Techniques like this allow for the game to run on multiple generations of mobile hardware that otherwise wouldn't be able to support the games. Dynamic shadows are normally saved for the player character or specifical enemies with environment relying on baked lighting. This allows the environments to still feel dynamic as the player will react, though underneath the lighting of the environment is static.

A particular example that comes to mind when thinking of mobile optimisation with lighting is 2020's Genshin Impact. Genshin uses a hybrid system that utilises extensive baked global illumination for its massive open world and dynamic character lighting and shadow maps to create its visual spectacle. It also takes advantage of stylised shading in order to mask its limitations with hardware. These techniques are also seen in 2023's Honkai Star Rail (created by the same company as Genshin Impact) as Honkai Star Rail (HSR) uses various examples of baked lighting alongside stylised lighting to create visually stunning scenes that hardly drain battery or require large amounts of computing power, making it capable of running on various devices ranging from mid range phones to flagships. With it ultimately emphasising that stylised look and controlled lighting environments which keeps performance stable.

Mobile hardware capabilities continue to eveolve and improve as we see GPU features that allow lighting workflows to be entirely reshaped. With things like hardware acceleration and ray tracing now being prevelant on many flagship smartphones which allows limited usage of features like ray traced reflections and ambient occlusion. While full ray traced lighting remains out of the question for most mobile games, the fact it is possible now proves as a large step in the right direction for mobile games and its lighting options. Developers can opt into scarcely using these features to create things like pre rendered cutscenes, or allowing high end graphics modes as a togglable setting for smartphones that can support it, rather than just having one set graphic setting. 

In conclusion, lighting for mobile games is a difficult scale to balance. On the one hand you want to create a game that can be visually appealing to players whilst maintaining a modern standard of effects and graphics, though you dont want your game to be too hardware draining and system heavy. Though through these limitations, mobile developers have continiously pushed the barrier of what is possible both hardware wise and visually. Usage of optimisation techniques and stylised shading approaches have allowed mobile games to achieve graphical quality that would've once been deemed impossible not even a decade ago. As more pipelines are created and new APIs are developed, mobile games will only evolve positively when it comes down to creating experiences that can stand on the same two feet as home console and PC releases.



# BIBLIOGRAPHY

Kim, S., Harada, T. and Kim, Y. J. (2018) 'Energy-efficient global illumination algorithms for mobile devices using dynamic voltage and frequency scaling' In: Computers & Graphics 70 pp.198–205.

Frisvad, J. R., Christensen, N. J. and Falster, P. (2005) 'Lighting effects for mobile games: SIGRAD’05 : Special Theme: Mobile Graphics' In: Proceedings of SIGRAD’05 pp.13–18.

Sun, Q., Wang, Z., Leung, C. and Xiao, Y. (2023) 'Real-Time Lighting Effects for Consumer-Grade Mobile Graphics Hardware' In: IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics PP pp.1–1.
